_____________________________

# Cyber Defense Frameworks

____________________________

## Key Takeaways:

 - Understanding key concepts of the Pyramid of Pain and how it can be used to slow and thwart attacks

Lab still in progress...
_____________________________

### The Pyramid of Pain

The Pyramid of Pain is a ranking system of indicators that can be used by defense teams to understand what blocks and changes they can action in order to slow down (aka cause 'pain') for attackers. This can be used to prioritize what actions to take when responding to an incident.

Below are the different layers of classifications based on how much 'pain' they can cause an attacker:

#### 1. The lowest tier - Trivial - File Hashes

The trivial tier is used to classify file hashes, as they are incredibly easy on both blue and red end to deal with. It is very simple for a security analyst to write a blocklist rule for a file hash, immediately killing and quarantining it when present. That being said, it is just as easy for an attacker to rotate this hash by appending the file. Simply changing one letter in the file will completely alter the hash, making the blocklist made by the defense team obsolete.

#### 2. Easy - IP addresses

The next tier would be blocking IP addresses. This, same as hashes, are a simple blocklist rule made by security analysts. For the attackers, this rule can very easily be evaded through fast flux DNS. This is a technique that uses short TTL DNS records that will constantly cycle the IP address their domain names point to. That means that even if one IP is blocked, the record will soon rotate to a new IP address to be utilized.

#### 3. Simple - Domain Names

Domain names are a step above IP addresses as they are a little bit harder to cycle than IP addresses, given they typically require acquiring a new domain to do so. That being said, DNS registrars make it easy to do this nowadays through API calls and simple scripting. In addition to that, there are also ways to obfuscate domains like Punycode. Punycode is converting non-ASCII capable words into a Unicode ASCII encoding. This can be used to make domains look like something they are not, tricking defense teams. In addtion to that, tools like URL shortener links can be used to hide their domains from defense teams (like bit.ly links).

#### 4. Annoying - Network/Host Artifacts

This level is where power begins to fall into the defense team's hands. Finding artifacts within the systems or networks that identify IoCs generated by the attacker will lead to attacker to adjusting his toolset and methodologies. This is time and resource consuming, slowing down and sometimes thwarting the attack. These artifacts can be things like suspicious process execution, suspicious host events/services after running an application, maliciously modified files, C2 calls, suspicious GET/POST requests, unexpected SSH access, etc.

#### 5. Challenging - Tools

If a defense team can catch and eliminate the main tool from the attackers arsenal, it puts the threat actor in a very challenging position. They must now (if they want to continue the attack) either rebuilt or source another tool of the same or likely better caliber to proceed with the attack. This can be accomplished through things like EDR signature detection, YARA rules, etc., that can catch the behavior of malicious executables and block it accordingly.




